now internal disagreements within the US
government over how the administration
is dealing with Israel's actions in Gaza
has led to a steady stream of
resignations at least seven officials
have resigned since October last week a
senior State Department official quit
over a report that denied Israel has
been blocking Aid to Gaza here are some
of the findings of the reports the
report found the Israeli government has
been actively involved in encouraging
protests and attacks on Aid convoys a do
dou umented Israeli strikes on
coordinated humanitarian movements
inside Gaza and also found inconsistent
rejections of humanitarian supplies and
a lack of clarity on how cargo is
checked yet that same report notes it
does not currently assessed the Israeli
government is prohibiting or otherwise
restricting the transport or delivery of
us humanitarian
assistance while Stacy Gilbert is the
former State Department employee who
resigned over that report she was a
senior civil military adviser at the
Bureau of population refugees and
migration at the US state department and
is joining us live on Al jaer from
Baltimore in Maryland Cy thank you so
much for being with us on Al jaer so you
resigned after 20 years in the state
department can you explain to us first
what led to your decision and just how
difficult a decision it was for
you um so we were tasked by the White
House in early February to write a
report assessing countries two things
countries compliance with International
humanitarian law also known as the law
of war or the Geneva conventions and
their willingness to facilitate
humanitarian assistance Israel was not
the only country but as you can imagine
it was the country that generated the
most debate um within within um the
subject matter experts who were drafting
the
report um at some
point myself and a few other subject
matter experts were removed from the
report it was moved up to a higher level
and I read the report when it was
released on May 10th and um it was the
first time actually that I'm aware of
that we admitted that Israel is using Us
weapons in violation of international
humanitarian law but it was also very
Stark that it said Israel is not
blocking humanitarian assistance right
and I know that's not true I know others
know that's not true and that was the
reason I decided to resign I I I will
ask you about what the report says a
little bit more I just wanted to know if
it was specifically working on this
report that led to your resignation or
was it perhaps an accumulation of
concerns that you've
had it it's definitely an accumulation
of concerns but I was in a unique
position having been working on this
report um it
was I can't recall in my many years
working in the US government seeing
anything so so obviously wrong that
everyone agrees is wrong and yet that
was what we submitted as a report to
Congress all right but it was it was an
accumulation a lot of frustration okay I
I just want to pay you a sound bite of
vid vidan Patel the state department
spokesman who was asked directly at a
press conference about your resignation
and here is what he had to
say we stand by uh the National Security
memorandum uh 20 report uh we are not an
Administration or a department that uh
twists the facts and um allegations uh
that we have are are unfounded uh but uh
this is as any report and as any process
um that is undertaken in a policymaking
process these processes are deliberative
and they involve inputs from people um
at a variety of uh seniority uh and
expert levels so you heard there the
state department spokesman saying that
they stand by this report what is your
reaction to that and how is the initial
report that you worked on different from
the final report that was
released the conclusion of the subject
matter experts who work in humanitarian
assistance not only in the state
department but also
usaid and the organizations on the
ground in Gaza is absolutely unanimous
that Israel is blocking humanitarian
assistance and has been which is why
Gaza is why there's famine why
why the hospitals have been bonded it's
it is so patently clear that that is
what's happening
and my understanding is lawyers perhaps
drafted that that conclusion why why is
the state department not being honest
then about the situation in your
view by if the determination is that
any any partner country is blocking
humanitarian assistance a country that
is also receiving our weapons
assistance there is another consequence
a consequence under us law that triggers
a s a cessation of our security
assistants so I think they're very very
worried about making a determination
that makes that triggers those kind of
consequences
Stacy you're one of several uh officials
who have resigned in in recent weeks and
months over the US administration's
support for the war on Gaza do you get a
sense that this is having these
resignation are having an impact in any
way are they making a difference is the
administration at some point going to be
listening to experts like
yourself I will say I was able to leave
because I know others feel the same as I
do and I know they will continue to to
change the policy to to make our to be
more honest in our assessments I know
they will continue to do that work on
the inside I made the determine based on
my position that my voice would be
better heard outside the government
because they knew very well what what
the humanitarian experts thought and it
that that it's not just an opinion there
is quantifiable data and that was
overruled for a very legalistic
interpretation the Biden Administration
has now presented this plan to end the
war on Gaza so far the Israelis haven't
accepted it what what should the US be
doing now Stacy in your view you have
experience working in this
Administration what what do you think is
the right thing to do to end this war
now I think I think it's been very clear
from the very beginning our ability to
influence Israel is
negligible and continuing to do the same
things that that have clearly not
resulted in much good up to now it it's
time to end that we need to
leverage we need to use the tools that
we have to leverage better behavior and
I think that's in ceasing the weapons
trans fers um but we need to do it it's
not just for for Israel and and we need
to end the conflict but we also need to
adhere to our own law I am concerned
that in putting out this report we are
skewing the facts um to the detriment of
our own law our own policy and the
consequence of that in Gaza is is
disastrous it also it so profoundly
affects our policy in so many other
places around the world um it's very
difficult to tell Russia to stop bombing
civilian facilities in Ukraine when we
see the same thing happening by by
Israel in Gaza Stacy thank you so much
for talking to us and sharing your
experience with us on Al jazer Stacy
Gilbert former State Department official
who resigned recently thank you very
much for joining
us thank
you make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer